Chris Welcome to The Accidental Gods
podcast how are you and where are you
this slightly gray December day over
here but it might be lovely where you
are hi Amanda it's pleasure to be here
with you I'm speaking to you from
Weaverville North Carolina which is just
outside of Asheville North Carolina and
it's a sunny day here it's going to be
in a lovely afternoon in the mid 40s wow
okay now now I have Weather Envy but but
hey you're in a swing state which at
some point we might get on to that must
have been quite entertaining for a brief
period of time let's not go there it's
too painful all right
so you've written a number of books you
had a very inspiring life and my
projection onto you which I am almost
certain is not true is that you have the
answers to life the universe and
everything so we'll lay that one to bed
as it's my projection and you don't see
it that way just so clear we're there
and from where you are what is most
alive for you at this inflection point
of
humanity well we've just gone through an
election in our country which was for
the liberal side of the continent like
me was very disappointing and very
upsetting what's happening in politics
in my country and in many countries
around the world this whole movement to
the conservative right is very much of
concern especially since they are
denying fundamental facts that are CR
critically important for Humanity to
address first and foremost is uh the
fact of global climate change um and
um yeah so that's happening and in my
book LSD in the mind of the Universe I
have a whole chapter on what I call the
birth of the future human which
summarizes all the
Transmissions that were given to me over
a 20year course of high dose lstd
sessions about Humanity's future where
we are in our evolutionary
development um the critical crisis that
we are moving
into uh the birth of of a new form of
humanity coming out of that crisis so
when I and a a great future for Humanity
but for a deep spiritualize realization
to emerge in humanity there must take
place first a Dark Night of the Soul a
collective Dark Night of the Soul so I
see what's happening politically uh
against that backdround of a
growing dismantling of assumptions a
growing unraveling of our social
contracts and uh a growing Global crisis
which seems to be generated by uh seems
to be generating by a series of EOC
crises okay so that gives us an opening
into the birth of the future human um
for those watching on YouTube my cat is
on the desk it's easier to let him just
ramble across and then he'll go away it
I'll be fine
um before we go there so it seems to me
let's just address the politics because
it's aive for everyone this is going out
at the start of the New Year
2025 is going to be the year when
everything changes yeah America sneezes
the world gets a cold and and nothing
will be the same particularly not
geopolitics is about to shift enormously
I think a a US Russian Alliance has
never happened before and it looks like
it's arising in real time and it seems
to me 71 million people voted vot for
Trump that means by my Reckoning
259 million didn't and yet there's been
effectively a bloodless coup by the
fascist right and yet no amount of
ideology however forcefully they try to
impose it can actually overcome
biophysical reality you cannot stop
climate change by pretending it's not
happening yeah the the the ostrich
position is only useful until the flood
waters fill the hole that you've stuck
your head in yeah
so it seems almost to me that also to me
that the shifts that we need need to be
inner and collectively inner which is
exactly the field that you're working in
yeah and we don't want to go back over
everything that you experienced but I
wonder if you've got a kind of an
elevator pitch of where you started and
where it took you to in terms of your
own spiritual process is that something
that we could go into sure I can give
you a kind of a quick overview I began
my psychedelic work when I was just
hired as a university professor in
Northeast
Ohio uh and I began this work as a
pretty well educ ated dedicated agnostic
with strong atheistic inclinations
that's where all the years of graduate
school had brought me but just when I
started teaching I came across the work
of stanislav gr and his book Realms of
the human unconscious changed the
direction of my life I saw the
importance of his work for my discipline
which was philosophy of religion I'm not
a psychologist I'm not a therapist I'm a
professor of philosophy of religion and
so I began an underground
uh regimen of psychedelic therapy
because I knew that in order to speak
intelligently uh using this new
methodology you had to do the work
yourself and even though it was illegal
by this time this was
1978 when I started my career I started
my psychedelic work in
1979 psychedelics were illegal I made a
decision to do this work uh in
underground fashion completely isolated
um I never let my students and most of
my faculty never knew what I was doing
in this regard I continue this work for
20 years uh I started it when I was 30
and I finished it when I was 50 and I
did 79 high does LSD sessions which is a
very aggressive protocol I don't
recommend this
protocol you did this so we don't have
to as far as I can see and I'm
enormously grateful yeah and then I
spent another 20 years digesting those
experiences writing about them
integrating them trying to integrate
them and written two books based on
those experiences one of them is Dark
Knight early Dawn which came out in 2000
and probably the more important one for
a wide audience is LSD in the mind of
the universe which came out in
2019 so I did this work for 20 years and
then LSD in the mind of the universe
came out 20 years later after I stopped
after you'd integrated a lot of what
happened and after you were also it
seems from the book just beginning to be
able to start talking about
it CU you you had issues where you
couldn't speak you physically couldn't
speak because you couldn't speak of what
you understood and what you knew can you
tell us a little bit about that that
seemed to me quite an integral part of
what was happening well I love teaching
and I love working with the students
students I I just really love being in
the classroom and I knew that if I began
to speak openly uh about psychedelics in
the SE 70s 80s 90s even I very likely
would lose my Prof my position at the
University uh and so I could not speak
openly about my work I mean I really I
spoke indirectly by giving teaching
courses on psychedelic therapy and Stan
gr's work and other people's research
but I I didn't wasn't able to own my
experience es publicly at my University
till the very very tail end of my career
I retired in 2011 in order a little bit
early in order to give me time to bring
forward what I consider my most
important work and my conviction is that
psychedelics represents a revolution not
just in in therapy not just a clinical
Revolution but a revolution in How We Do
philosophy and this methodology is that
we move systematically into fa very
carefully controlled non-ordinary States
we experience them as consciously as we
can we bring them
back preserve them write a detailed
written account within 24 hours and then
spend some time digesting them
integrating them with our other bodies
of knowledge then going back into that
state and coming in so this method of
systematically entering into
non-ordinary States and coming back
represents a new me methodological
platform for the doing of
philosophy so what we're looking at is
what the emergence of what I would call
a psychedelic philosophy a psychedelic
that's grounded on the systematic
application of non-ordinary states of
Consciousness through the use of
psychedelics um yeah can I interrupt
here because this is already opening
doors and um and I'd like to go down a
few of them so we're talking about
integrating with other systems and in
the book you were becoming quite deeply
involved in some Buddhist practices I
were they Buddhist I think
um and and so it strikes me within the
shamanic world we get a lot of people
who want to go off and do iasa or do
mushrooms and it seems to me there it's
shortcutting and not universally I have
spoken to people who are absolutely
prepared to go and spend six months in
the forest alone with the plants and
integrate it but there are an equal
number of people who seem to think they
can go from point A to point Zed without
actually doing any of the steps in
between and what I'm think I'm hearing
from you is that the steps in between
are absolutely crucial and that they
need to be undertaken in a structured
fashion in in spite of the fact that it
we feel to me to be moving away from the
reductive scientific space where atoms
move around like billiard balls and
everything is predictable as long as we
have enough data points yeah to a point
of where everything is emergent and
complex and actually nothing is
predictable but experience the the
phenomenology of living yeah is what
matters
and the more than human world comes in
and takes part it it seemed to me
reading certainly the second
book to an extent the first but
particularly in the second that there
was an extraordinary coherence you had a
six-year Gap in the middle and yet when
you when you went back you basically
took off it was like a serial dream
which those of us who practice dreaming
you sometimes night after night after
night you're in the same story and you
were getting this you were in a an
almost linear progression except it was
more fractal than linear I would say you
you're building on previous knowledge
and you were being taught yeah quite
clearly and so can you unpick for us a
bit of the structure that you see that
is
useful in order for this to be something
that helps us move towards being future
humans
okay well there several things rolled
into your observations they're all good
they're all good
observations um so some process uh
comments
um first I think integration is very
important we're finding we have the
technology the the the chemical
technology to trigger very deep States
Of Consciousness but these states of
Consciousness may have very little
lasting impact on how are deeply
engrained psychological cultural habits
if we don't take time to sit with these
experiences and integrate them as deeply
as we can into our embodied existence uh
and over the course of my work I learned
that even though I was paying a lot of
attention and doing as as good a job as
I could to integrate each individual
session and doing an adequate job I
think I still underestimated the
long-term challenges of integrating an
entire spiritual journey but I did not
fully comprehend this until I had
stopped my journey at the end and then
realized how hard the stopping hit me
which then exposed the uh the imbalance
the failure to integrate uh the radical
the most extreme most radical
experiences which were the deepest
experiences being drawn into intimacy
into communion with
I'm I want to say the Divine but I I'm
cautious about that because we have to
unpack all sorts of theological you know
uh not on this podcast actually you
could we talk about the heart mind of
the universe all the time which I think
is is for me what you would call the
Divine so I think we can assume that
unpacking has been done in the past five
years heart mind of the universe is good
I like that's why the book is called LSD
in the mind of the universe it could be
the heart mind of the universe yeah U
but you came to a point where you were
basic basically marking time waiting to
die in order to return to Unity with the
Divine yes did I understand that
correctly no you un you got it correctly
it's kind of jumping ahead to the story
let me back up and work to that point
okay good if you work and and I think in
order to extract the maximal
psychological psychospiritual and
philosophical value these experiences
it's very important to create a
container what I call the the the Kaa of
practice a container which affords you
uh the best opportunity for absolutely
clear contact with these deeper States
Of Consciousness without interruption
without
confusion no outside contact you're in a
therapeutic environment you're lying
down you're with a skilled sitter uh
you're listening to carefully curated
music uh it's a it's a it's a complex
process which you have to prepare for
you have the session you you're
integrating the session acutely for
several days after so each session takes
a week essentially to you know just for
the immediate session uh and then as you
build on these sessions over time I
you're right it's a linear I found a
linear progression relatively speaking U
you know Consciousness is a holistic
phenomenon so you may experience
multiple levels of consciousness
simultaneously you may experience some
deep levels of consciousness early in
your journey work but if you work
systematically my experience at least is
that there was a progressive deepening
so that I went through rounds of of
deepening when I was writing up my
journey at the very end I looked at my
the Total Landscape of my experiences
and I broke it down into five
fundamental Landscapes that I had been
exploring one is personal mind your
personal
unconscious second is the collective
mind the species mind Carl Yung would
have called the collective psyche third
archetypal
mind fourth causal mind the mind of
Oneness and fifth the diamond Luminosity
so my experience was I would work I
would go through successive succession
of death and rebirth experiences
eventually I would have a breakthrough
that would catapult me into a new level
of
Consciousness where I would have to
learn how it worked it was a totally
different it was like a different
physics governing this level of reality
and I would work there I would continue
to learn there but in that process I
would go through more purification
exercises more episodes of death and
rebirth that weren't simply repeating
ego death but were taking me into a deep
deeper cycle of death and rebirth and
eventually that would culminate and it
would I would have a breakthrough into a
completely different level of reality
and that level of reality I would all
start over again I wouldn't understand
how it would work it would be confusing
then I would keep going back to it I'd
get my seal legs I would acclimate to it
my my Visionary experience would get
clearer and then I would go and get
propelled into another level of reality
and when I was in the middle of the
deepest deepest level I went into the
diamond Luminosity I had an experience
in which I was I had an experience of a
level of light Beyond The Diamond
luminosity and a ray of light came out
of that reality hit me shattered me and
what it taught me was it's an infinite
progression I had thought in the
beginning it was a matter of becoming
one with God or getting to the metac
cosmic void stage of work but what I
found is that there are many many levels
of God there many levels even of the
Primal void that's an infinite
progression you'll never reach the end
to of it even using as powerful a
protocol as high dose LSD work and that
really is one of the things that shifted
my entire orientation
because if I were doing it over again I
would be much gentler with myself I
would use lower doses I would balance
and Vary the Psychedelic that I was
using because I've learned that the goal
of the work is not to get to some end
stage or end point which would you know
change your life forever but the goal is
simply to open let as much of the wisdom
of the universe in as possible as much
of the love as much of the insight and
then spend weeks months years
integrating that those experiences
changing whatever it is about your life
that is keeping you from experiencing
those realities on an everyday daily
basis and then continuing work so at the
end of my journey I had I found that I
had gone so deep
into intimacy with the Divine into the
Divine Light dissolving completely into
feels of
light transcending space and time so
deeply that when I stopped this work
and and I'll go later if you want to why
I stopped the work but I stopped it
after 20 years and then in the Years
following I found that I was missing the
Transcendent Clarity so
deeply uh that I found I was just
waiting to die so that I could return
When I died and after reflecting on this
for a long period of time I began to
realize something's not right this is
not the way this work work is supposed
to end it's not healthy and I spent a
lot of time then studying my work to try
to find out where I had gone wrong and I
realized I came to realize that I had I
had gone so deeply into Transcendence
that I had created an imbalance within
my Incarnation an imbalance which was
tilted towards Transcendence at the
expense of embodied affirming my deeply
physical bed existence and both of the
these are two fundamental truths we are
always tapped into Transcendence we're
always tapped into the physical world
but I had tilted the balance very far
and I had to make a conscious choice to
reground myself in physical
reality uh so that I could
become U more comfortable in my own skin
and this began and writing LSD in the
mind of the universe was a tremendous
help because I was speaking about my
experiences and I'm an academic and I
you know I love to talk so I I love to
teach and by speaking about these
experiences it it empowered my
integrating the experiences and by
sharing them publicly after so many
years of keeping them private it allowed
a healing to take place inside my own
psyche between that which had had been
hidden and that which had been public
between the higher and that which is
quote lower or the earthier um yeah yeah
again many doors opened we want to come
back to why you ended I would like to
make clear to people listening first of
all this was industrial doses of LSD and
you've explained that you went through
death and rebirth experiences I think
it's worth pointing out that there were
points where you were vomiting so hard
for so long that the vessels in your
eyeballs r
it yeah it wasn't sounding like a whole
lot of fun to me and you also had your
then wife who was a trained psychologist
psychotherapist I can't remember but she
was very good at holding the space so
you had a lot of anchoring and it still
sounds like the early part of every
single Journey was living hell as far as
I can tell would that be fair yeah it's
it's what I discovered eventually that
there is a purification cycle
early traditionally we would call it the
death rebirth cycle but we often think
of death as something that happens to us
one time and a lot of the therapeutic
literature in psychedelic work circles
focuses on ego death which is for me is
only the first round and what I learned
later after you've died many times in
this process I mean completely loss of
control metaphysical confusion just
complete surrender to overwhelming
metaphysical uh
waterfalls uh you learn that first you
cannot die it's impossible to Die the
form that you are can die the structure
of life as you have known it can be
extinguished but the Inner Essence of
your being always reemerges the Phoenix
always Rises and I in that process I
also learned that death what we
experience as death is actually an
extremely int form of
purification when your purification
reaches so deeply that it reaches into
the
fundamental assumptions that structure
your experience of reality then death
has returned to Grace you right so it's
purification
breakthrough experiencing a deeper State
and if you want to stop at that level
that's perfectly fine different people
use different psychedelics different
modalities that different powers to and
some psychedelics only have sufficient
power to reach certain levels happened
that the the method that I was using the
substance I was using was so powerful it
had the power to keep breaking me
through level after level in this
systematic fashion um yeah yeah and and
did you choose LSD because of Stang gr
and and it was the thing back in the 70s
that I suppose that's a head mind
question but my spirit mind question
is you could have done a lot of
different things ioska wasn't around
much but mushrooms were there were other
things that were there do you think that
whatever it is that guides you through
this Incarnation LED you to that because
you said you wouldn't do it again now
but you wouldn't be who you are now if
you hadn't yeah gone through the the par
yeah the military the military version
of of completely destroying yourself
many times can you speak to that well to
understand why I chose LSD you have to
go back to 1979 1980 iasa was still not
yet on the playing field for most part
just early mushrooms certainly were I
understood LSD to be more powerful than
mushrooms so the the the primary reason
though is that my work was based upon
Stan gr's work and I trusted Stan I
trusted his research and Stan did most
of his work with LSD so that's where I
dug in I I dug in there later after I
finished my 20e journey I've done many
psychedelics I've done mushrooms and 5
Meo and Salvia deorum and San Pedro uh
different psychedelics in
iwasa which are are beautiful and
they've taught me a lot uh and I have a
certain sense of that each of these
psychedelics impact the spectrum of
Consciousness or open some portion of
the spectrum of Consciousness the the
the kind of contact I experience with
psilocybin for example is very body
grounded very emotional body grounded
LSD tends to be a have a high
cosmological sealing tendency certainly
at high doses it tends to push the high
ceiling whereas psilocybin is much more
grounded earthy in my Earthly existence
yeah and and it's seems to me it's more
to do with
opening doors into the rest of the web
of life rather than necessarily Cosmic
awareness not that the two are mutually
exclusive but there's as you were saying
there's a tilt one way or the other a
tilt yeah I want to move towards the
future human but just before we go there
I'm wondering
how was it taken in academic circles
when you wrote these books were there
people who then came to you and went yes
I've been wanting to do this or I have
been doing this and thank you for
opening the doors or were there others
For Whom the door was now shut and you
your access was denied how did it land
with your
people uh my work has been well received
in the Consciousness
community and in the academic Community
they don't even know I exist for the
most part it's been ignored there hasn't
been a single professional review
published of my work out of a
hardcore academic philosophy journal or
religious studies Journal um but you
must have friends who could publish in
those journals you must have ways into
that if if people wanted to is it just
not worth their career to do that you
know I just one of the things I decided
early on in my career was not to try to
address the reservations which were
abundantly clear to me coming out of the
traditional academic mindset I decided
that if I tried to justify the method
and justify the experiences to my
colleagues it would it would hamper me
it would hold me back I just decided to
push deeply ahead and let the chips fall
where they may and and I understand uh
how exotic how strange my claims are how
they sound to people ra you know raised
educated in a traditional environment
and I've just decided to let that go and
let history sort things out I I am
acutely aware that I'm writing not for
my present generation I'm writing for my
for future Generations who will you know
yeah Paradigm chains take place in
evolutionary context and so I'm just
doing the work and letting other people
sort out what they think it's worth down
the road and with any luck I I would
have given my ey teth to be one of your
students and it sounds like there are
particularly we we touched on the
earlier moments when you were having
what we would now consider to be psychic
experiences where you knew things that
from non-ordinary reality not when you
were on the LSD but just when you were
teaching and then and then you had to
hold them in because if you said
something it was basically going to blow
everybody's fuses and they were going to
wonder how you knew it and didn't
explain how you knew it but those
students I am thinking have been in the
in the field of your awareness at a
point when you are experiencing i' I've
begun to see the world in a different
space so with any lot they'll go off and
change the world so I'll take one aspect
about that
particular I never let my students know
that I was doing this work but I began
to find that even though they did know
about my psychedelic work they began to
have experiences which were moving
showing that they were being impacted by
my psychedelic work and secondly my work
was changing me
at a deep structural level so that my
person became a lightning rod that was
sparking
transformational insights or
breakthroughs among my students without
me consciously intending it I began when
I would be
lecturing I was drawing into my lecture
examples which were purely random for me
but the examples I was being told were
actually the exactly the same thing that
had been happening to my students that
week and the things I was saying began
to touch them in very very deep personal
intimate places places they were wounded
uh places they were blocked from going
forward this became such a common
feature of my work that eventually I
spent a lot of time studying this and
developing an entirely new way of of
teaching to take into account the truths
that I was discovering in the classroom
and in my psychedelic work that evolved
around the boundaryless nature of
Consciousness feels of Consciousness
that feels develop in groups there's an
energetic resonance which happens
underneath the verbal exchange of ideas
as a Consciousness directly engaging
Consciousness and so I published a book
in 2008 after I stopped my sessions
called The Living classroom in which I
lay it all out uh but I never mention
psychedelic
because the issue is not psychedelics
the issue is consciousness the potential
of conscious so if you do very deep
Consciousness work without psychedelics
I think you can trigger the same things
that I experienced but eventually just
recently this actually this month uh
Sunni press is bringing out a second
edition of the living classroom and in
this Edition they invited me to tell the
truth about my psychedelic practice
because I'm out of the closet by now LSD
in the mind of the universe was out so
the new addition of the living classroom
makes clear that it was my psychedelic
practice that was driving the phenomena
that were emerging in my classes even
though I think other people not using
psychedelics can experience the same
thing so that's that's a whole another
uh another aspect that has to do with
integration because integration here
means taking care not only of yourself
but taking care of anyone whom your
practice touches which for me included
many of my students and one-third of the
book is just essays that my students
have written very deep essays personal
essays about their own spiritual
experiences their experience of death
it's a that's a beautiful section of the
book right I will find that and put a
link in the show notes and you were
still teaching the philosophy of
religion at this point you hadn't
branched out into other things is that
right yeah I I was teaching classically
religious studies courses introduction
to world religions Eastern religions
Buddhism psychology of religion
mysticism and meditation you know
classic curriculum gosh I wish there
were the classic curriculum when I went
through but my my senior apprentice and
I don't work with psychedelics but we
work we teach shamanic studies and I
found even when I'm talking about the
book in front of uh a literary Festival
that's that you basically full of
ordinary middle class people who come
along and had nothing better to do and
wanted to get out of the rain as far as
I can tell and you end up drawing in
examples that seem to come out of
nowhere and then someone goes oh you
just me mentioned Boston and something
about streets in Boston about which I
know precisely nothing I come from
Boston and the streets are just like
that so so I'm sure that what you said
is absolutely true and and at a deeper
level when we're teaching a held Circle
then then the resonance is move across
the circle but becoming aware of these
such that everyone in the circle is
engaging with that strikes me as a step
towards future
humanism where I think we're becoming
conscious of the things that can help us
to be different humans once you
understand how Fields work and once you
develop a protocol that maximizes
potential of the emergence of cons of
these Consciousness changing Fields
within groups then you you do it in a
way that accelerates deepens not only
the learning experience but it
accelerates the transformational value
of these exercises for everyone involved
and this applies not just to university
courses it applies in Research
Laboratories in boardrooms wherever
citizens Gather in sustained
conversations uh which is where most of
our change takes place in dialogue with
other human beings and so this is very
relevant to uh
the challenges moving into yeah yes so
let's go there so let's lay out where I
think roughly we're at and you can tell
me because you live in the US and I'm
just watching it with kind of squinched
up eyes from across the water waiting
for it to come over here you know musk
has already said he's going to basically
buy the next election and we have always
had the best democracy money could buy
so
yeah unless we can change the Democratic
process that's it
so mus and starlink I I've been floating
across substack watching some very
interesting very geeky people pointing
out how he managed to steal the election
and how the numbers don't add up but you
know if you're going to feed everything
through starlink the person who owns the
starlink can make it say what they want
it to say you and I are talking across
many thousands of miles using technology
that in the end is basically owned by an
individual who might be very interesting
but I don't necessarily want them
knowing everything that I think can do
so it seems to me that Evolution only
happens under moments of intense
pressure I would like this moment not to
become any more intensely pressurized
probably will but yeah this is as much
as I ever want therefore can we evolve
our
Consciousness to become future humans
and it seems to me that you have a
doorway and a framework and a concept
within which that could happen does that
how does that bend with
you um that all aligns fine and and I
think you're absolutely correct I'm not
sure that I have a doorway that I would
recommend as such but I do think that
psychedelics have entered our historical
scene at precisely a time when we need
more awareness we need it for
therapeutic Pro P processes we need it
for political processes we need to wake
up and grow um and so I think it's
historically important and there are
thousands and thousands of people
working conscientiously not
superficially but very conscientiously
working with psychedelics in order to
heal the accumulated trauma of many
lifetimes um and to open up a deeper
communion with the intelligence that's
resides within the universe to help us
make a transition from a mechanical dead
Universe of of dead matter to a living
universe that's alive at its core that's
expressing its its
intentionality through the uh Quantum
jumps that take place in our
evolutionary journey and I think we are
coming into a Quantum jump right now in
a
nutshell uh well let me back up a
sec this chapter the birth of the future
human and everything that it contains is
completely came into my work by complete
surprise I thought of myself doing the
work I was doing for personal
transformation personal healing maybe
even personal
Enlightenment but what happened is that
the method was so powerful it pushed
beyond all those categories and I had to
reframe my understanding of the
boundaries of conscientious psychedelic
work in a way that dropped the model of
personal transformation and opened up
into a model of collective
transformation I had years and years of
experiences where the shadow that I was
engaging was not my personal Shadow I
did that work but this was a collective
Shadow the pain and the excruciating
suffering that I was processing had to
do with the pain of my entire
species uh and there that I came to
understand that there is a collective
psyche
that that holds the trauma of Humanity's
history just as our individual TR psyche
holds the trauma of our individual
history and this Collective trauma and
Collective pain encumbers the free
functioning of the collective psyche
just as our individual trauma encumbers
our individual health and
well-being
so by doing this work uh I began to
understand that something in the
universe was using my sessions to make a
small
contribution to Healing the collective
psyche in order to make it more
available to the influx of energy from
Divine
Consciousness uh to allow it to manifest
more completely uh in humanity now right
that that bit can you just say that
again because I think that's really
important it's not that it's that
opening of the door to something that's
trying to come in is that what I just
heard you say can you just repeat that
because I think that needs
emphasizing I think we are living at a
time of ascending spiritual energy
there's it's almost like there's an
influx of higher light energy spiritual
energy pushing in on us and our the pain
of our history the the the karma of our
narrowness of our smallness of our
trying to live within a framework of
individual ego at cost of anyone else's
well-being uh keeps us um locked away uh
uncens insensitive to this incoming
light and as in any mystical development
before there is a a breakthrough into
nonu or unitive Consciousness there is a
Dark Night of the Soul where you have to
undo you have to let go of all of the
obstacles all the the blocks and I think
this is happening at a collective level
not only inside intense psychedelic
sessions but everywhere if you're doing
past life therapy many of the lives that
come up to be cleansed or uh not
necessarily your personal former lives
but they can be lives within the system
social movements to end child abuse to
end abuse of our daughters to end racism
to end speciesism these things are
tackling these movements are tackling
pains which are much deeper than simply
our personal pain and we are the whole
system is kind of straining against the
burdens of the past in order to open
itself to take in more powerfully uh the
energy of our future the light of our
future so so in that context in the
middle of this work I began to receive
visions that were stable they were
consistent and they stretched over
several years they were dropped into my
sessions about where humanity is in its
evolutionary Journey where it's going
and there was a message of we were
coming into a time of radical pivotal
breakthrough a before and after time
that the past would become quickly
irrelevant because something
fundamentally new was emerging but it
never showed me for years how nature was
going to accomplish this I had no
idea and then in
1995 years later I had a fundamental
experience where and I was working at
very deep Levels by this time I was into
the diamond Luminosity material but this
session took me and it broke me open it
dissolved my mind into the species mind
and then asked the consciousness of the
species and I I understand how radical
an assertion that is and I don't take it
lightly but the species mind opened into
it took me into future time it took me
into what I call Deep time and in that
future I experienced the death and
Rebirth of humanity I experienced
Humanity coming to an absolute breaking
point a point of breakdown an unraveling
of of fundamental trust fundamental
convictions within our culture a deep
systematically systematic breaking down
until the entire planet it seemed was
faced with the task of mere survival
just trying to
survive and it looked like it was an
Extinction event at first it looked like
that was it we we were we had overloaded
the system so badly we had
overdrawn the the ecological balance
sheet of the planet so badly that we
weren't going to come out of it but then
what happened in the Visionary
experience is just when things were at
their
worst we began things began to get
lighter we and people who had been
brought to their knees
began to stand up and it began to
reconst delate and as we reconst delated
e after these series of Crisis and I
don't know how long they will last I
think of this as kind of a three
generational pivot I can't imagine it
lasting less than that it seems to be
the 21st century is a major pivotal
point because we know by by 2030 2040
2050 we're going to be getting into
worse and worse and wor yes
environmental
crisis and I think what H what I think
is happening is
that by the time we go through this
crisis will we will crack open something
so deep in the human spirit so deep in
the human psyche that what will emerge
is a literally transformed Humanity not
simply transformed
individuals but a transformation of the
fundamental substructure of the human
psyche I think of this as a shift in the
plate tectonics of the collective
unconscious so that every human being
born after this period of History will
be experiencing Consciousness within the
context of a collective psyche that is
different than how we were experiencing
it in the 19th and 20th Century now or
for a long time before that within our
long time before that yeah now there's
another theme that came came in
where it gave me some of the details of
what the future human is and and in
other sessions I was taken far into the
future and experienced the this
archetypal new archetype of the future
human but in a very profound
experience I had an experience of of I
believe in reincarnation I my first book
was on reincarnation I think the
empirical evidence for reincarnation
from a philosopher's perspective is
overwhelming that's I'll put those cards
on the table it's always been part of my
thinking while I went into these
sessions based on the evidence not
because of religious beliefs and I
experienced reincarnation Dynamics many
times in my sessions not only my
personal reincarnational history but I
experience reincarnation as a dynamic
process for the entire planet the entire
species is pulsing in the rhythm of
reincarnation
and if that's true that reincarnation is
a basic fact of life then we have been
we have been building the future human
for hundreds of thousands of years we
have been growing bit by bit bit by bit
bit by bit we remember our former lives
usually when we die and we return to the
domain of the soul but I think we are
coming into a point of History where the
soul is actually coming becoming
conscious inside our historical
existence and the way I experienced this
was one day in my session former lives
were coming into me just coming into me
and it was like
wrapping bright white light filament
around a kite spool and there came a
moment where they seemed to hit critical
mass and when they hit critical mass
they fused into one and when they fused
into one there was an explosion of
diamond light from my heart and I was
catapulted into a state of consciousness
where I was an
individual but I was Far Beyond Chris
Bas I was an individual like I had never
known individuality before and I came to
call this the birth of the diamond Soul
now many people are experiencing this
they give it different names the how I
call it is simply my way of languaging
at the birth of the diamond soul and I
think what's happening is that the soul
which is the Consciousness that holds
all our former life
history is waking up inside our
historical existence and is supplanting
egoic existence so that we have lived
egoic existence for thousands and
thousands of years but now the ego has
driven the planet into Redline
conditions into unacceptable stressful
conditions and now we either grow up or
we go extinct
and what growing up amounts to I think
is owning the Deep history and the Deep
Consciousness which is our truer nature
it's all Divine of course but the form
of the Divine is our soulle
nature and it's not just individuals I
mean who are waking up but now nature is
putting enormous pressure to wake up the
entire species the entire species is
become
a species of Christ a species of Buddhas
a species of prophets of great spiritual
Saints and sages of of
History that's the pivot we're trying to
make we're trying to make the pivot of
growing up taking the Long View the
seven generation view uh really looking
at and when the soul wakes up of course
the whole our whole history becomes kind
of dynamically alive within us we have
been male female we have been every race
on the planet we've been every religion
on the planet all of these relatively
and the other species I don't think
we're all
human
absolutely and so I think that's what's
happening and I think we are being
brought to a critical Choice Point
uh driven by the ecological crisis and
the other systemic crises which are
contingent upon
the economic realities of the past we're
coming into a meltdown point of those
realities a choice
point so definitely I totally take what
you're saying and I would agree with it
if somebody is listening to this podcast
pretty much by definition they still
have an amount of resource and privilege
because they have the time and the
resources to do that yeah it and I hear
you that this is perhaps a three
generation
span but I'm wondering where we are in
those three generations we might not be
the first or the three generations alive
on the planet at the moment the the kind
of Boomers CH X CH Zed but then all the
others that we've got more than three
generations alive yeah anybody listening
wherever they are in the span of age or
gender or
race what would you recommend as clearly
we don't have a formula go and do this
and this and this but the concepts
within which they could prioritize
life this is we're this is going out on
New Year's Day so what do we do for what
do we create as our sole as in s so
priorities for 2025 that would help to
move this process forward Yeah couple of
quick background assumptions that I make
one is that this is a transition which
will take the entire resources of the
Human family it so there is no one
formula it'll take everything we have
everything we are it'll take scientific
knowledge economic knowledge political
skills educational skills medical skills
it'll take everything we have to move us
through second thing is my assumption is
and this is based upon years of studying
the past life
literature that each one of us has
chosen where and when to Incarnate with
a certain prevision of what we're
getting into to and what will be the
dominant themes of that Incarnation and
the resources available within that
Incarnation that this is part of our
incarnational psychic makeup and that
means each one of us is
already positioned by the Soul by our
soul to make a contribution to this
transition that we are coming into so
it's not a matter of looking around
outside of oneself for somewhere else
it's a matter of looking deeply into
where we are what we are the key
question is not so much what can I do
the key question I think is will we have
the courage to do what is within my
reach to do that's the key question if
everybody does what is within their
reach to do we will make it through this
now going One Step Beyond that there are
many people I think who are
giving us good wise Elder advice on how
to engage this moment in history how to
move it
forward uh very simply put I believe one
of the ways to do this is to
become what you believe the planet needs
right now to become it in your own
personal life to be to internalize the
beliefs the habits of mind the generos
it of heart the clarity of our thinking
and our social skills and in Social
Community networks to become what the
planet needs if you have a clear
understanding of what the planet needs
and we begin to do that then we become
kind of a microcosm of the whole
evolutionary pivot and what is alive
within us stimulates and activates what
is the people around us who are
struggling to do the same thing so we're
all in this together our arms are all
interl one cell awakens another cell
right right yes the Field Effect you
were talking about earlier if we can
come into alignment connect to the Web
of Life ask what do you want to me and
be that yeah then that in itself ripples
out and it stops our head Minds having
to plan which seems to me quite a
letting letting heart mind lead and head
mind follow an inversion of how we' got
here but seems to me quite important
that's so for example we think that the
future human the planet needs more of a
heart based epistemology a heart-based
source of action and so to put the heart
mind kind of ahead of the the Mind mind
the Mind head mind that's a reading of
what's emerging of what we need to do
right right and and our understanding
May yet evolve I wouldn't say that's
necessarily an end point but it's it's a
starting place to move from here this is
Chris I learning deep biomimicry
learning The rhythms of nature learning
what's alive and what's in the in the
physical world in the animal world and
the world of insects everything around
us understanding how we have created
imbalance how we can restore systems how
to create harmony with those systems how
to learn from the engineering that
nature has already accomplished through
billions of years of evolution within
those systems so many ways yeah and and
I'm thinking healing the trauma if
Francis Weller is right and we are the
trauma culture and the indigenous
peoples are are a more whole version of
humanity we have 10,000 years of
ancestral trauma and potentially
previous life trauma and it seems to me
that I I end up talking sometimes with
people who are Fixit on healing their
ancestors and I am increasingly feeling
that if I can heal in the
moment yeah that that ripples up and
down the timeline that time is not
necessarily one linear thing chunked
into identical portions but that healing
now if I can become a fully realized
human being yeah that ripples to my
parents and their parents and their
parents all the way back down the line
and I don't have physical descendants
but down a spirit descendant line and
that that saves me feeling that I have
to heal 10,000 years of ancestors which
is a big ask and quite demoralizing how
does that land it lands well now within
a reincarnational framework we add the
writer that we were our ancestors so we
can think of our ancestors in this way
we were our ancestors so when we're
healing our ancestors in part we're
healing our own lineage but anybody
worth their salt any mother any father
worth their salt who sees a child which
is not their own in need in pain
actually reaches out to to help heal
that child so healing once you really
immerse yourself in that process the
boundaries of healing expand uh it that
healing the trauma of ancestors healing
the traumas of your neighbors healing
the trauma of actually creating traumala
societies for our future children it's
it's all good work it's all hard work
and it's the work of the hour isn't it
right and people I have a suspicion are
going to be emailing me afterwards
asking where they can get enough LSD to
start in the process read the book first
people because Chris did things that
that the rest of us I don't necessarily
think we want to do but psychedelics are
big now is it your belief that everyone
should
be within a structured and held way and
with suitable reflection exploring
psychedelics or is it that a critical
mass does that and the effect rolls out
to the rest of us I don't think it's
wise for everybody to to have a value
that everybody should try psychedelics
get into psychedelics uh psychadelics
are basically amplifiers of
Consciousness they amplify Consciousness
what you do with those Amplified states
of awareness in those precious hours
really determines the value how you use
them you can use them Rec recreationally
you can go to a Grateful Dead concert
you can talk with some friends or you
can use them to expose Your Shadow to to
heal your Shadow and to move into deeper
cosmological exploration but many of us
are caring tensions within our psyche
which should not be
Amplified and this I mean Carl Yung uh
would listen to people's dreams on their
first day when they came to work with
them and he wouldn't work with some
people because he knew that they were
not ready to undertake the depth of work
that would emerge working with him and I
think this is true for psychedelics
there are some people who should there
are a lot of people who should not use
psychedelics the the circumstances the
patterns of their Consciousness
currently it's too strong a medicine
they need a gentler way in slower way in
uh but among people who are uh say
basically healthy a healthy psyche we're
not carrying do you know anyone who has
a healthy
psyche I know some who have a healthier
psyche Health yes yes I'm thinking of a
lot of my friends who are just really
wounded guys I think a lot of people
that I know have of healthier psyches
but I think all of us are carrying quite
deep Frozen Parts still and if you go in
if you're work and choose to work with
psychedelics I would say very controlled
circumstances
you know you really want to batten down
the hes carefully before you set out
into the deep water
uh very conscientious uh control of dose
first purity of substance because that's
always an issue and you know pure
substance because a lot of crap comes in
what you get on the street uh pure
substances careful containers
therapeutic structure you know
therapeutically monitored structured
experiences groups are are I don't think
it's good to do what I did to work solo
uh it adds unnecessary burden it's good
to have a group even though you were
held by the person who held you you
weren't completely Sol I was held by I
wasn't totally alone I was held by my
wife uh Carol that my and who was a PHD
psychologist but it wasn't healthy in
the sense that I didn't have a group
that I could share my experiences with
beyond that inner circle I wasn't able
to talk about it and to take in other
people's experiences until way too far
down the road so you know iasa
communities psilocybin communities where
people can work journey together process
together be a mirror to each other help
expose the the shadow in their post
session personalities the greatest
danger of working with psychedelics is
psychic
inflation right you can think that
because I have become God and now I can
tell you everything yeah yeah exactly
just because you've had a special
experience you think you're a special
person uh and you know it that's just a
big fallacy um yeah there's a few I
scares in the incoming Administration in
the US or at least not iOS scares but
people who have taken iOS in the
incoming Administration in the US and
yeah I'm sure they're wonderful human
beings but
they and break everything yeah and I
think uh one of the things that I heard
from an iosa who has spent very large
amounts of time in the forest is that
Western people tend to want to come in
do it and go away again and don't want
to spend the weeks and months of really
getting to know the plant and and
letting go of the ego it's yeah it's a
process not an event process we're not
used to that in our culture and let me
recommend a book on iasa to your read to
your audience and that is Bill Barnard's
book published by Columbia University
press which is insignificant and his
book is liquid light and Bill is a
university professor at Southern
Methodist University he had several
books to under his belt he's a very well
recognized uh philosopher of religion he
has a book on William James a book on
hre beron but the book liquid light
tells a story of years and years and
years decades of going down to South
America living in the in the Sant Dam
Community working every sabatical on
every vacation with his teachers there
and it it's a it's an analysis of the
Santi diic community and it's also an
analysis of his own experiences in the
Santi diic community so it's another
academic
becoming autobiographical without being
trapped within his personal story and
and it's specifically focused and he is
a beautiful writer and these experiences
are very
powerful brilliant I will find that and
put it in the show
notes I could go on forever we are
heading towards the end of time yeah um
the end of our time not necessarily the
end of all time a number of
questions with all of the coders of what
we just said it strikes me that you are
probably familiar Now with an emerging
network of people who are working
together together with a variety of
different psychedelic substances are you
seeing networks of Consciousness such
that people
are this is about to sound really flaky
but a lot of the push that I'm getting
is to do the work so I can actually
connect with all of my students in the
dream in a way that we're both fully
aware of not I just get an email going I
saw you in the dream last night you did
this and I think well that's really nice
but I have no awareness of that um that
we move to methods of human
networking that are similar to but
beyond the digital networking that we
just moved into within the last 20 years
yeah are you seeing anything approaching
that or if not would you like to speak
to what is happening in terms of a
collective Community if anything yeah
well I first I want to own my
limitations in that even though I've
published this book and even though I
speak at some conferences I don't speak
at most psychedelic conferences because
my work is pretty radical and the focus
on the Psychedelic Renaissance right now
is on therapy and careful scientific
studies demonstrating the the the
therapeutic efficacy of psychedelics and
that's perfectly fine that's that's
where we need to be but there the
movement is not yet pushing the
cosmological territory that I pushed in
my work yeah it'll get there there must
be somebody somewhere it can't be the
just you did it well people like Bill
barard and there are people but I think
a lot of it is still underground at this
point um so I am aware of certain Trends
in the Renaissance community and in the
Psychedelic Community but I I don't have
a Catholic comprehensive breath of
access to what's happening so I you know
I worked in
isolation my work is unusually intense
and extreme
and I I live basically a pretty quiet
life around that but what I do see and
and there are some people doing as
you're describing cultivating kind of
communities of of um paranormal contact
within the dream state extended dreaming
uh doing different things there are
people who are working in meditation
trying to integrate psychedelics into
meditation circles
uh there's a lot there's a lot going on
a lot moving I think uh the internet is
a physical manifestation in a sense the
the hardwires of an emerging of this
emerging field Consciousness so that
even if we don't accomplish these
networks psychically we certainly can
we're on a network right now we're this
is a Global Network that we're part of
it is but somebody could pull a plug on
it
tomorrow if China or Russia or somebody
decides to just switch it or or monitor
it such that it's not safe to say
anything outside a certain narrow
bandwidth could be it could vanish the
freedom that we have just now is not is
not a given I would say whereas if we
could talk to each other without needing
the internet it would be quite hard to
interfere with that it would be great
that the complication of course is the
clarity of the transmission the purity
of the transmission because the personal
psyche throws up all sorts of filters uh
sure does yeah yeah ego gets in the way
basically head mind gets in the way yeah
yeah okay uh I think we never got to
actually you said I'll come to it later
of why I stopped did you feel that you
covered that did you want to cover that
if not is there anything else that you
feel we could usefully cover in the time
that we've got well that's actually
might be a good place to to wrap up some
of the discussion and uh because it's
relevant uh to where we might go uh I
stopped for two reasons I stopped
first uh because my physical system the
my subtle Energy System my Prana or Chi
Energy System was running so hot after
all these years of practice that uh it
was producing certain physical symptoms
that was leaving me continually
physically
uncomfortable uh and I describe these in
the book but basically I understood
enough about pronic energy and arotic
medicine and to understand what was
happening and I was just running too
much energy but that's not the major
reason I stopped the major reason I
stopped was heartache that is it was
getting increasingly difficult to come
back from the deep state of
ecstatic
Transcendent immersion in the Divine
fabric to come out of that back into my
time space
reality and there are beings there are
great beings who are able to sustain
that those transcendental States in
their time space personality they are
great Masters and truly all honor to the
great Masters I'm not one of those
beings this is a path of temporary
immersion that's different than the path
of contemplative presence so I can go
into those States but I have to come out
of them and eventually coming back out
just became too painful of a separation
so
uh I stopped and I knew I would be
stopping for the rest of my life because
it takes years and years of momentum to
develop the energy to break into these
high high energy
states I could if I did a massive dose
of LSD right now I would not be able to
go back to where I was working at the
end of my 20year journey yeah so I knew
I was stopping for the rest of my life
but it was important for me to stop uh
and I had to First learn how to manage
the heartache and then to begin the
process of working the slower process of
integrating those living memories
actively living memories into my
physical existence
which conversations like this actually
help me do so it's a very it's healing
for me to talk about these things with
you um so and the way that this applies
to maybe some of your listeners is to be
careful about how much you bite off in
your sessions because even if you're
really committed to conscientious
integration you can bite off more than
you can chew or more than it's wise for
you to chew
so I
think we can learn a lot from the
contemplative Traditions it's one of the
advantages I had going into this work I
was teaching courses in mysticism and
meditation teaching courses in Shamanism
and Buddhism so I I understood the
literature of mysticism I
understood the practices of mysticism
the purification processes and I and I
tried to use those processes in my own
work and and there's a lot of wisdom
there so it's it serves you to be well
read and and I think to recognize the
limitations of anyone
Incarnation I think that in some
ways I went to places that were so deep
it will take me not just one Incarnation
but multiple incarnations to truly
integrate them and by that I mean being
able to manifest those levels of a
Consciousness inside my my physical
Consciousness
comfortably okay right yes yes so I I
would basically hate for
anyone to try to do what I did and get
into trouble and hurt themselves that
would just break my heart yeah yeah I I
think we've we've got the the health
warnings fairly clear on here if you're
going to work with things work with
somebody who knows really what they're
doing um me and my Apprentice are are
working too fun find people that we can
pass people on to because we get emails
saying I took substance X and basically
I'm having a psychotic breakdown what
can I do and we're shanic practitioners
actually it's not our field so we're
trying to pass this on to people who can
actually help but they're few and far
between because there's a lot more
people who think they can help than the
ones who can actually help so take great
care find test your people out before
you decide to do something that is
irreversible I would say it's really
clear and then do the work beforehand
and do the work during and do the work
after after to integrate and integrate
and integrate and do it because you're
doing it in service to life and not
because you're trying to make your ego
feel happy strikes me as a quite
important one have I missed anything out
on the health world I think it's great
and if you do your work well one of the
things that happens is you lose all fear
of death you once you transition several
times into that reality you know in your
bones from your own experience
that death is not an end of anything
it's simply an end of an incarnational
cycle and there is absolutely nothing to
fear about death death is homecoming all
of the Hollywood that are
thrown up at us for you know Dark Places
and demons and ghosts and all this stuff
it's just nonsense 99% of people die and
make a transition into the light
perfectly naturally and comfortably if
you are afraid of dying you've got your
entire metaphysics upside side
down death is homecoming death is the
end of your this matriculation it's the
harvesting of your life birth should be
mourned and birth is where the work
begins it's like being a freshman in
college it's hard graduation is
wonderful right and when you lose your
fear of death and you begin to
understand the deeper
[Music]
meaningful challenges which are embedded
in our time space
experiences then the
whole if you lose your fear of death
your whole game of Life Changes because
death is what people fear more than
anything else and if you don't have that
fear then you're you're going into a
different life style a different way of
living uh a more Joyful Way of living
yes yes thank you thank you that feels
to me a fantastic place to end does that
feel good to you it feels good to me all
right in that case Chris thank you so
much for coming on to The Accidental God
podcast this has been an absolute
Delight I have enjoyed every moment and
I think what a way to start the year
thank you thank you Manda and thank you
for your work we need all of the
awareness that we can bring to ourselves
and you are certainly bringing awareness
to many people thank you thank you